Finland's Eurovision entry hitting stage amid tight security
The contest's semi-final starts on Tuesday in Malmö, Sweden as hundreds of police officers gear up for anticipated protests against Israel's war in Gaza.

Closeup of Swedish police officer uniform sleeve with colourful Eurovision Song Contest posters in the background.

Open image viewer
Swedish tabloid Aftonbladet has reported that the security effort surrounding the contest would involve hundreds of heavily armed police officers brought in from across the country. Image: Johan Nilsson / AFP
YLE NEWS
16:30
Many preparations for this year's Eurovision Song Contest (ESC), which starts in Malmö, Sweden on Tuesday night, have nothing to do with the music and glitz that usually take centre stage.

Due to anticipated protests against Israel's war in Gaza and other security risks, there will be a major police presence around the contest's venues.

Swedish tabloid Aftonbladet reported on Tuesday that the effort would involve "hundreds of heavily armed police officers". The paper noted that the security detail includes rooftop snipers and officers armed with automatic weapons as thousands of fans, including families with children, attend the event.

Aftonbladet also reported that police officers from across Sweden would be taking part. Malmö police have previously announced that the venues will also be monitored with a number of security cameras.

To enter the arena, ticket holders will be subject to airport-like security checks and are forbidden from bringing in bags — as well as Palestinian flags and signs containing political messages — to the venue.

Windows95Man Euroviisuissa.

Open image viewer
Windows95man Teemu Keisteri and guest vocalist Henri Piispanen (on left) speak to reporters in Malmö. Image: Berislav Jurišić / Yle
As controversy over Israel's participation in the contest grew, Finland's entry, Windows95man (Teemu Keisteri, and guest vocalist Henri Piispanen), announced in February that they would still take part, as a way to continue urging ESC organisers to ban Israel.

As Finland's public broadcaster, Yle is a partner of the European Broadcasting Union (EBU), which organises ESC every year. Following discussions with Windows95man, in February Yle confirmed in a statement that it would continue preparing for the contest in Malmö.

The EBU has not banned Israel from taking part in the contest, citing the annual event's non-political status.

On Monday it was reported that more than 1,500 music industry professionals in Finland had called for audiences in the country to boycott this year's broadcasts.

That same day, Miikka Koivisto, who has hosted a music programme for YleX radio since 2018, announced that he was resigning due to the company's participation at Eurovision.

Koivisto made the announcement in his podcast on Monday, saying that it would be his last day of employment at the broadcaster, as he accused Israel of "committing genocide in Palestine".

Finland's Windows95man is scheduled to perform their entry No Rules!, alongside contestants from 14 other countries including Portugal, Ukraine, Ireland and Serbia on Tuesday evening.

Yle will broadcast the semi-final live on Tuesday at 10pm on TV1, Radio Suomi, Yle X3M and on its multimedia streaming platform Areena.
